This is what happened. On the night that the worst heat wave in northern New England
history finally broke-the night of July 19-the entire western Maine region was lashed with
the most vicious thunderstorms I have ever seen.
We lived on Long Lake, and we saw the first of the storms beating its way across the
water toward us just before dark. For an hour before, the air had been utterly still. The
American flag that my father put up on our boathouse in 1936 lay limp against its pole.
Not even its hem fluttered. The heat was like a solid thing, and it seemed as deep as
sullen quarry-water. That afternoon the three of us had gone swimming, but the water
was no relief unless you went out deep. Neither Steffy nor I wanted to go deep because
Billy couldn't. Billy is five.
We ate a cold supper at five-thirty, picking listlessly at ham sandwiches and potato salad
out on the deck that faces the lake. Nobody seemed to want anything but Pepsi, which
was in a steel bucket of ice cubes.
After supper Billy went out back to play on his monkey bars for a while. Steff and I sat
without talking much, smoking and looking across the sullen flat mirror of the lake to
Harrison on the far side. A few powerboats droned back and forth. The evergreens over
there looked dusty and beaten. In the west, great purple thunderheads were slowly
building up, massing like an army. Lightning flashed inside them. Next door, Brent
Norton's radio, tuned to that classical-music station that broadcasts from the top of
Mount Washington, sent out a loud bray of static each time the lightning flashed. Norton
was a lawyer from
New Jersey and his place on Long Lake was only a summer cottage with no furnace or
insulation. Two years before, we had a boundary dispute that finally wound up in county
court. I won. Norton claimed I won because he was an out-of-towner. There was no love
lost between us.
Steff sighed and fanned the top of her breasts with the edge of her -halter. I doubted if it
cooled her off much but it improved the view a lot.
" I don't want to scare you," I said, "but there's a bad storm on the way, I think."
She looked at me doubtfully. "There were thunderheads last night and the night before,
David. They just broke up."
"They won't do that tonight."
"No?"
"If it gets bad enough, we're going to go downstairs."
"How bad do you think it can get?"
My dad was the first to build a year-round home on this side of the lake. When he was
hardly more than a kid he and his brothers put up a summer place where the house now
stood, and in 1938 a summer storm knocked it flat, stone walls and all. Only the
boathouse escaped. A year later he started the big house. it's the trees that do the
damage in a bad blow. They get old, and the wind knocks them over. It's mother
nature's way of cleaning house periodically.
"I don't really know," I said, truthfully enough. I had only heard stories about the great
storm of thirty-eight. "But the wind can come off the lake like an express train."
Billy came back a while later, complaining that the monkey bars were no fun because he
was "all sweated up." I ruffled his hair and gave him another Pepsi. More work for the
dentist.
The thunderheads were getting closer, pushing away the blue. There was no doubt now
that a storm was coming. Norton had turned off his radio. Billy sat between his mother
and me, watching the sky, fascinated. Thunder boomed, rolling slowly across the lake
and then echoing back again. The clouds twisted and rolled, now black, now purple, now
veined, now black again. They gradually overspread the lake, and I could see a delicate
caul of rain extending down from them. It was still a distance away. As we watched, it
was probably raining on Bolster's Mills, or maybe even Norway.
The air began to move, jerkily at first, lifting the flag and then dropping it again. it began
to freshen and grew steady, first cooling the perspiration on our bodies and then seeming
to freeze it.
That was when I saw the silver veil rolling across the lake. it blotted out Harrison in
seconds and then came straight at us. The powerboats had vacated the scene.
Billy stood up from his chair, which was a miniature replica of our director's chairs,
complete with his name printed on the back. "Daddy! Look!"
"Let's go in," I said. I stood up and put my arm around his shoulders.
"But do you see it? Dad, what is it?"
"A water-cyclone. Let's go in."
Steff threw a quick, startled glance at my face and then said, "Come on, Billy. Do what
your father says."
We went in through the sliding glass doors that give on the living room. I slid the door
shut on its track and paused for another look out. The silver veil was three-quarters of
the way across the lake. It had resolved itself into a crazily spinning teacup between the
lowering black sky and the surface of the water, which had gone the color of lead
streaked with white chrome. The lake had begun to look eerily like the ocean, with high
waves rolling in and sending spume up from the docks and breakwaters. Out in the
middle, big whitecaps were tossing their heads back and forth.
Watching the water-cyclone was hypnotic. It was nearly on top of us when lightning
flashed so brightly that it printed everything on my eyes in negative for thirty seconds
afterward. The telephone gave out a startled ting! and I turned to see my wife and son
standing directly in front of the big-picture window that gives us a panoramic view of the
lake to the northwest.
One of those terrible visions came to me-I think they are reserved exclusively for
husbands and fathers-of the picture window blowing in with a low hard coughing sound
and sending jagged arrows of glass into my wife's bare stomach, into my boy's face and
neck. The horrors of the Inquisition are nothing compared to the fates your mind can
imagine for your loved ones.